---
layout: post
title:  "New paper: genus $1$ curves and Brauer groups"
tags: 2021
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\nil{\mathrm{nil}}
\newcommand\gfrak{\mathfrak{g}}
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\R{\mathrm{R}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand\T{\mathrm{T}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Fscr{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\dRhat{\widehat{\dR}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\Sym{\mathrm{Sym}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand\TR{\mathrm{TR}}
\newcommand\THH{\mathrm{THH}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bS{\mathbf{S}}
\newcommand\bQ{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand\bC{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand\bN{\mathbf{N}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand\Sp{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand\CycSp{\mathrm{CycSp}}
\newcommand\TCart{\mathrm{TCart}}
\newcommand\Fr{\mathrm{Fr}}
\newcommand\Br{\mathrm{Br}}
$
</div>

<!--ëéö-->

[Asher Auel](https://math.dartmouth.edu/~auel/) and I have posted our paper
[\[AA\]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.04291) on
splitting Brauer classes with genus $1$ curves. This paper was eluded to in the
[post]({% post_url 2021-03-03-jonality %}) on jonality. In the language of that
post, our main theorem gives a bunch of new cases where the jonality of a
Severi--Brauer variety is the lowest possible, i.e., $1$. Equivalently, we give
new cases where the following question has a postive answer.

**Question**. Let $k$ be a field and let $\alpha\in\Br(k)$ be a Brauer class.
Is there a genus $1$ curve $C$ over $k$ such that $\alpha$ pulls back to zero
in $\Br(k(C))$?

Two previous papers deal directly with this topic. The first is a paper [\[dJH\]](#dejongho) of Johan de Jong and Wei Ho. They prove that
if $k$ is a field and $\alpha\in\Br(k)$ is a Brauer class of degree $2,3,4,5$,
then $\alpha$ is split by a genus $1$ curve. The arguments in their paper are
all geometric. For example, if $D$ is a degree $3$ division algebra with
Severi--Brauer $P$, then a general anticanonical section is a genus $1$ curve $X$ splitting inside $P$ which
necessarily splits $\alpha$. The case of $d=2$ is similar and those of $d=4,5$
are similar, but more complicated.

The second paper is
Saltman's [\[S\]](#saltman), who exhaustively analyzed the degree $3$ case to answer for
example whether it is always possible to split with a genus $1$ curve of any
given $j$-invariant (no).

A closely related paper [\[HL\]](#holieblich) of Wei Ho and Max Lieblich establishes that every Brauer class is split by a
torsor for an abelian variety which may be taken to be either a Jacobian of a
high genus curve or a product of such a Jacobian with an elliptic curve.

Our contribution is to consider the problem from a cohomological perspective
which is especially suitable for use in the context of global fields.
In some sense, our work is an inverse to the work of Ciperiani and Krashen who
actually compute the Brauer classes split by a *given* genus $1$ curve.

# Splitting $\mu_N$-gerbes

Our strongest results are for classes of smallish degree over global fields. 
We tackle these by answering a harder question in many cases.

**Question**. Let $k$ be a field and let $\beta\in\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_N)$ be a
$\mu_N$-cohomology class (for example lifting $\alpha\in\Br(k)$). Is there a
genus $1$ curve $C$ defined over $k$ such that $\beta$ pulls back to zero in
$\H^2(C,\mu_N)$.

The conclusion is strictly stronger than asking for the vanishing of the class
in the function field of $C$. This turns out to be a subtle phenomenon. In
general, the curve $C$ might split $\alpha$ but not $\beta$, or it might be
that it splits a $2$-torsion class of $\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_4)$ but not its unique
lift to $\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_2)$.

Note that the Severi-Brauer variety of a central simple algebra $D$ of class $\alpha$ *never* splits $\beta$ in the
sense above. Using a Leray-Serre spectral sequence, one sees that in order to
split $\beta$ there must be rational $N$-torsion in the Picard scheme, which
rules out many interesting classes of varieties. It also means, by Mazur's
theorem, that there is no
hope of a positive answer to the question for non-zero classes of
$\H^2(\Spec\bQ,\mu_p)$ when $p\geq 11$ is prime.

Here is one of our main theorems.

**Theorem A**. Let $k$ be a field and let $\beta\in\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_N)$. If
$\beta$ is cyclic, then $\beta$ is split by a genus $1$ curve in the following
cases:
- $N=2,3,4,5$,
- $N=6,7,10$ and $k$ is global,
- $N=8$, $k$ is global, and, if the characteristic of $k$ is not $2$, then $k$ contains $\zeta_8$,
- $N=9$, $k$ is global, and, if the characteristic of $k$ is not $3$, then $k$ contains $\zeta_9+\zeta_9^{-1}$, and
- $N=12$, $k$ is global, and, if the characteristic of $k$ is not $2$, then $k$ contains $\zeta_4$.

Note that every class $\beta$ is cyclic when $k$ is global.

We were very excited about this result because it's the first positive result
in this direction
involving $p=7$. Of course, the requirement that $k$ be global and that
means that this theorem does not have the same applicability as the earlier
result of de Jong and Ho.

The main idea in the proof is rather simple, although implementing it required
a key idea of Saltman. The idea is to look at $\mu_N$-isogenies of elliptic
curves

$$0\rightarrow\mu_N\rightarrow E\rightarrow E'\rightarrow 0,$$

which guarantee that $E'$ has an exact order $N$-point $P\in E'(k)$. There is
then an obstruction class $\delta(P)\in\H^1(\Spec k,\mu_N)$ to lifting $P$ to a
rational point of $E$. Then, the boundary map

$$\H^1(\Spec k,\bZ/N)\rightarrow\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_N)$$

induced from the $N$-torsion groupscheme $E[N]$ is of the form

$$\chi\mapsto[\chi,\delta(P)],$$

the cyclic class corresponding cupping a character $\chi$ with the class
$\delta(P)$. It is easy to see that if $X_\chi$ is the $E$-torsor corresponding
to $\chi$ under the map $\H^1(\Spec k,\bZ/N)\rightarrow\H^1(\Spec k,E')$, then
$X_\chi$ splits $[\chi,\delta(P)]$. Thus, one wants to find ways of generating
lots of possible $\delta(P)$s. For $N=2,3,4,5,$ one can find a $\mu_N$-isogeny
as above where $\delta(P)$ is any given element of $k^\times/(k^\times)^N$,
which is enough to prove Theorem A.

For larger $N$, this seems to be impossible. Instead, in the global field case, one can find an
isogeny where at least the extension $k(\delta(P)^{1/N})$ splits the cyclic class
$\alpha=[\chi,u]$.
Then, theorems of Albert, Vishne, and Mináč-Wadsworth, imply that you can
pick a different character $\chi'$ such that
$\alpha=[\chi,u]=[\chi',\delta(P)]$ under the assumption on roots of unity in
Theorem A.

The population of the argument with lots of $\delta(P)$s uses that that the
modular curves $X_1(N)$ are rational and have lots of rational points, even
over $\bQ$, when $N=2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12.$ Then, an explicit calculation in
`MAGMA`, explained to us by Tom Fischer, produces formulas for the $\delta(P)$
in terms of a parameter on these modular curves.

For example, when $N=7$ we use the elliptic curve $E'$

$$y^2+(1+\lambda-\lambda^2)xy+\lambda(1-\lambda)^2 y=x^3+\lambda(1-\lambda)^2x^2,$$ 

which has an exact order $7$ point at $(0,0)$. Fischer had already computed 
$\delta(P)=\lambda^6(\lambda-1)^3$ up to $7$th powers appears in an early
paper.



# Splitting Brauer classes with full torsion

Cathy O'Neil's thesis was about an obstruction theory for when the period of a
genus $1$ curve is equal to its index. This work was also taken up by Pete
Clark, and we further extend it to prove the following theorem.

**Theorem C**. Suppose that $E$ is an elliptic curve over a field $k$. If $E$
admits a full level $N$ structure $E[N]\cong\bZ/N\times\mu_N$, then every
cyclic class of $\Br(k)[N]$ is split by an $E$-torsor.

Using Theorem C and the Merkurjev-Suslin theorem, one can prove for instance that if $k$ contains $\bQ$, then
every Brauer class is split by a *product* of genus $1$ curves and one can
choose the Jacobians of those curves to have any given $j$-invariants in $\bQ$.
Or, if $k$ contains $\overline{\bF}_p$, then using the theorem above as well as
as a result of Albert, then every class of $\Br(k)[p^\infty]$ is split by a genus $1$ curve.



# Beyond cyclicity

It seems very difficult for our cohomological methods to extend beyond the
cyclic algebra case. However, when $k$ contains a primitive $N$th root of unity
and $E[N]$ has full level $N$ structure, then the methodology of Theorem A says
that certain $E$-torsors simultaneously split two cyclic algebras. At present,
we do not know if this is enough to split for example even all biconic class
of $\H^2(\Spec k,\mu_2)$.


# References

<span id="g1c">
[AA] Antieau, Auel, _Explicit descent on elliptic curves and splitting Brauer
classes_, [arXiv:2106.04291](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.04291).
</span>

<span id="dejongho">
[dJH] de Jong, Ho, _Genus one curves and Brauer-Severi varieties_, Math. Res.
Lett. **19** (2012) no. 6, 1357–1359. [arXiv:1207.4810](https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.4810).
</span>

<span id="holieblich">
[HL] Ho, Lieblich, _Splitting Brauer classes using the universal Albanese_.
[arXiv:1805.12566](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.12566).
</span>

<span id="saltman">
[S] Saltman, _Genus one curves in Severi-Brauer surfaces_,
    [arXiv:2105.09986](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.09986).
</span>
