---
layout: post
title:  "arXiv reviews 1: K-theory and polynomial functors"
stitle: "XR 1: K-theory and polynomial functors"
tags: 2021 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
$
</div>

<!--ë-->

The long-awaited paper [\[1\]](#bgmn) of Barwick, Glasman, Mathew, and Nikolaus has arrived.
They prove that the algebraic $K$-theory space functor
$$\K\colon\Cat_\infty^\perf\rightarrow\Sscr$$ extends to a functor
$$\Cat_\infty^\poly\rightarrow\Sscr,$$ where $\Cat_\infty^\poly$ is the
$\infty$-category of idempotent-complete stable $\infty$-categories and
polynomial functors, in the sense of Goodwillie calculus.
Moreover, the paper generalizes the main result of Blumberg--Gepner--Tabuada [\[2\]](#bg1) to prove that $K$-theory admits a universal property among all polynomial functors to spaces.

Recall that [\[2\]](#bgt1) gives a universal property of algebraic $K$-theory as a
functor on stable $\infty$-categories and exact functors. This result has been
the bedrock of many of the major results in $K$-theory in the past 10 years. Of
those, I give special mention to the work of Kerz--Strunk--Tamme proving
Weibel's conjecture, Tamme and Land--Tamme on excision, the collaboration of
various among Clausen, Mathew, Naumann, and Noel on nilpotence and descent in
algebraic $K$-theory, the work of Clausen, Mathew, and Morrow on descent and
rigidity in algebraic $K$-theory, and finally the work of Land, Meier, Tamme
(now with Mathew!) on telescopically localized $K$-theory.

One common feature of the works above is the interplay between the
universal and the specific. While the universal property enjoyed by $K$-theory
is used throughout, it is the study of what makes $K$-theory special
among localizing or additive invariants that has attracted attention and made
the area so interesting.

The present paper expands on this theme by endowing algebraic $K$-theory with
additional functoriality, generalizing, for example, the existence
the $\lambda$-ring structure on $\K_0(R)$ when $R$ is commutative.
This functoriality is not present on other well-studied localizing invariants,
such as topological Hochschild homology.

Let me say something about the precise statement of the theorem and the proof.

**Definition**. Let $\Cscr$ and $\Dscr$ be idempotent-complete stable $\infty$-categories. A
functor $F\colon\Cscr\rightarrow\Dscr$ is polynomial of degree $0$ if it is
constant. Inductively, $F$ is polynomial of degree $\leq n$ for some $n\geq 1$
if it preserves finite geometric realizations (i.e., geometric realizations of
        diagrams which are left Kan extended from $\Delta_{\leq
        d}^\op\subseteq\Delta^\op$ for some $d\geq 0$) and if for each $X\in\Cscr$ the
functor

$$D_XF(-)=\mathrm{fib}(F(X\oplus(-))\rightarrow F(-))$$

is polynomial of degree $\leq n-1$.

**Examples**. 
- Exact functors are polynomial of degree $\leq 1$.
- If $\Cscr$ is a symmetric monoidal idempotent-complete stable
$\infty$-category, then the functor $X\mapsto X^{\otimes n}$ is polynomial of
degree $\leq n$.
- The derived functors $\L\mathrm{Sym}^n$, $\L\Lambda^n$, and $\L\Gamma^n$ on
$\mathrm{Perf}(\bZ)$ of the
symmetric, exterior, and divided powers are polynomial of degree $\leq n$.

Fix a regular uncountable cardinal $\kappa$ and let
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf\subseteq\Cat_\infty^\perf$ be the full subcategory
of $\kappa$-compact objects. Let
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly\subseteq\Cat_{\infty}^\poly$ be the full
subcategory on the objects which are $\kappa$-compact in $\Cat_\infty^\perf.$
One has a natural functor
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf\rightarrow\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly$.

We are interested in product preserving functors $L$ on
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf$ or $\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly$ with values in
spaces (or, better, animae). Such functors
have the property that $L(\Cscr)$ is an $\bE_\infty$-space (a highly structured
version of an infinite loop space) and this is natural in exact
functors, but not polynomial functors.
We call such a functor **additive** if the abelian monoid $\pi_0(\Cscr)$ is an
abelian group for every $\Cscr$ and if for any split exact sequence
$\Cscr\rightarrow\Dscr\rightarrow\Escr$ in the sense of [\[2\]](#bgt1) the induced map
$L(\Dscr)\rightarrow\L(\Cscr)\times\L(\Escr)$ is an equivalence. Note that this
depends only on the restriction of the functor to $\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf$.
If $L$ is a
functor $\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly$, let $L^{\perf}$ denote its restriction to
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf$.

There is a universal **additivization** $L^\mathrm{ad}$ of a product preserving functor on
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf$ and a universal **polynomial additivization**
$L^\mathrm{pad}$ of a product preserving functor on
$\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly$. The main theorem relates the two. 

**Theorem**. For any product preserving functor
$L\colon\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\perf$, the natural map
$L^{\perf,\mathrm{ad}}\rightarrow L^{\mathrm{pad},\perf}$ is an equivalence.

The theorem implies the polynomial functoriality of $K$-theory as follows. Let
$\iota$ denote the functor which takes $\Cscr$ to its underlying space of
objects. This is naturally a product preserving functor
$\iota\colon\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly\rightarrow\Sscr$.
The main result of [\[2\]](#bgt1) implies that $\iota^{\perf,\mathrm{ad}}\simeq\K$. Thus,
the theorem above implies that $\K\simeq\iota^{\mathrm{pad},\perf}$. In
particular,
$\iota^{\mathrm{pad}}\colon\Cat_{\infty,\kappa}^\poly\rightarrow\Sscr$ is
the algebraic $K$-theory space functor with its polynomial functoriality.

The strategy of the proof is as follows. First the authors produce polynomial
functoriality
on the additive Grothendieck group functor $\K_0^\oplus$. This goes back to
work of Dold and Joukhovitski and relies on a simple observation about
polynomial functions, namely, that if $M$ is an abelian monoid, $M^+$ its group
completion, and $A$ an abelian group, the natural restriction map

$$\mathrm{Hom}_{\leq n}(M^+,A)\rightarrow\mathrm{Hom}_{\leq n}(M,A)$$

on polynomial functions of degree $\leq n$ is a bijection.

Second, one produces polynomial functoriality on the Grothendieck group functor
$\K_0$, obtained from $\K_0^\oplus$ by further killing the classes
$[B]-[A]-[C]$ whenever $A\rightarrow B\rightarrow C$ is an exact sequence.
This leverages the fact that polynomial functors preserve finite geometric
realizations and the Čech complex of $B\rightarrow C$ to reduce to
the split case.

Third and finally, the authors show that a compatibility between the two
additivization localizations. This relies on the notion of a universal
$K$-equivalence $\Cscr\rightarrow\Dscr$ and the fact that a certain
construction $\Gamma_n(-)$ preserves universal $K$-equivalences. Here,
$\Gamma_n\Cscr$ is an idempotent-complete stable $\infty$-category with the
property that exact functors $\Gamma_n\Cscr\rightarrow\Dscr$ correspond to
polynomial functors $\Cscr\rightarrow\Dscr$ of degree $\leq n$. The point is
that universal $K$-equivalences are checked in $\K_0$, so the previous
polynomial functoriality on $\K_0$ completes the proof.



# References

<span id="bgmn">
[1] Barwick, Glasman, Mathew, and Nikolaus, _K-theory and polynomial functors_, [<tt>arXiv:2102.00936</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.00936).
</span>

<span id="bgt1">
[2] Blumberg, Gepner, and Tabuada, _A universal characterization of higher algebraic K-theory_,
Geom. Topol. **17** (2013), no. 2, 733–838.
</span>

