---
layout: post
title:  "arXiv reviews 6: Coherent cochain complexes"
stitle: "XR 6: Coherent cochain complexes" 
tags: 2021 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\nil{\mathrm{nil}}
\newcommand\gfrak{\mathfrak{g}}
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\N{\mathrm{N}}
\newcommand\R{\mathrm{R}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Fscr{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\dRhat{\widehat{\dR}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\Sym{\mathrm{Sym}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bQ{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand\bC{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
$
</div>

<!--ëé-->

The final XR of 2021! This is about one of my favorite recent theorems, which
is due to Ariotta [\[1\]](#ariotta). I call it the **$\E_1$-page theorem**. There is a lot in the
paper, especially about Toda brackets and related questions, which I will
ignore.

The main idea is the following. Suppose that $\F^\star M$ is a decreasing filtered
spectrum

$$\cdots\F^{n+1}M\rightarrow\F^n M\rightarrow\F^{n-1}M\rightarrow\cdots.$$

For integers $a<b$, let $\gr^{[a,b)}M$ be the cofiber of
$\F^bM\rightarrow\F^aM$ and let $\gr^aM=\gr^{[a,a+1)}M$. Thus, $\gr^{[a,b)}$ is
an iterated extension of $\gr^aM,\ldots,\gr^{b-1}M$.

When $b=a+2$, there is a cofiber sequence

$$\gr^{a+1}M\rightarrow\gr^{[a,a+2)}M\rightarrow\gr^aM$$

which gives rise to a boundary map $$\delta\colon\gr^aM\rightarrow\gr^{a+1}M[1]$$. It is
not hard to check that there is a specified nullhomotopy of $\delta^2$ when
this makes sense. In particular, the sequence

$$\cdots\rightarrow\gr^{-1}M[-1]\xrightarrow{\delta}\gr^0M\xrightarrow{\delta}\gr^1M[1]\xrightarrow{\delta}\gr^2M[2]\rightarrow\cdots\quad(\color{red}{\ast})$$

looks like a kind of cochain complex in spectra. Lurie uses this idea in
*Higher algebra* to study spectral sequences and so forth.

Ariotta's paper makes precise exactly what kind of structure this sequence
inherits from the filtered spectrum $\F^\star M$ and the extent to which
$\F^\star M$ can be recovered from the sequence.

**Definition**. Let $\Xi$ be the pointed category consisting of a point $\ast$ and
an object $n$ for each integer $n$. Then, $$\mathrm{Hom}_\Xi(n,n-1)=\{\delta,\ast\}$$,
$$\mathrm{Hom}_\Xi(m,n)=\ast$$ if $m\neq n+1$, and $$\delta^2=\ast$$, when this makes sense.
The category $\Xi$ is the classifying category for cochain complexes in the
following senese: if $\Ascr$ is an abelian category, then the category
$$\mathrm{Fun}_\ast(\Xi,\Ascr)$$ of *pointed* functors $\Xi\rightarrow\Ascr$ is naturally equivalent to the category of 
chain complexes in $\Ascr$. Similarly, $$\mathrm{Fun}_\ast(\Xi^\op,\Ascr)$$ is
naturally equivalent to the category of cochain complexes in $\Ascr$.

**Definition**.
If $\Cscr$ is a stable $\infty$-category, then a **coherent cochain complex**
in $\Cscr$ is a functor $\Xi^\op\rightarrow\Cscr$. The $\infty$-category of
coherent cochain complexes in $\Cscr$ is $$\mathrm{Fun}_\ast(\Xi^\op,\Cscr)$$.

Note that a functor $\Xi^\op\rightarrow\Cscr$ specifies a sequence
$\cdots\rightarrow X^{-1}\xrightarrow{\delta} X^0\xrightarrow{\delta} X^1\rightarrow\cdots$
with *specified* nullhomotopies $\delta^2\we 0$ and an infinite amount of
coherent information relating the nullhomotopies.

**Ariotta's $\E_1$-page Theorem**. If $\Cscr$ be a stable $\infty$-category,
    then there is a natural functor
    $$\F\Cscr\rightarrow\mathrm{\Fun}_\ast(\Xi^\op,\Cscr)$$ from the
    $\infty$-category of filtered objects in $\Cscr$ to the $\infty$-category
    of coherent cochain complexes in $\Cscr$ which realizes the construction $(\color{red}{\ast})$ above. If $\Cscr$ admits sequential
    limits, then this functor induces an equivalence
    $$\widehat{\F\Cscr}\we\mathrm{\Fun}_\ast(\Xi^\op,\Cscr)$$, where
    $\widehat{\F\Cscr}$ is the stable $\infty$-category of complete filtrations
    in $\Cscr$.

Why do I call this the $\E_1$-page theorem?    

If $\Cscr$ admits a $t$-structure, then there is an induced *pointwise* $t$-structure on
the functor category $$\mathrm{Fun}_\ast(\Xi^\op,\Cscr)$$. If $\Cscr$ admits
sequential limits, then this $t$-structure yields the Beilinson $t$-structure
studied in [\[2\]](#bms2)
on complete filtered objects $\widehat{\F\Cscr}$. 
Given a complete filtered object $\F^\star M$, 
the $\E_1$-page of the spectral sequence of $\F^\star M$, with respect to the
fixed $t$-structure on $\Cscr$, is precisely the result of applying $\pi_*$ to
the coherent cochain complex $(\color{red}{\ast})$.
Ariotta's theorem says that conversely, if one keeps track of enough homotopy
coherence, then one can go backwards from the $\E_1$-page to the complete
filtered object. This lends new strength to the idea that spectral sequences
are filtrations...

It is possible that Ariotta's theorem can be extracted from Raksit's Koszul duality approach to
filtered objects in [\[3\]](#raksit), which in turn follows Lurie's work in
the rotation invariance paper. I have not checked the details.

Happy new year!


# References

<span id="ariotta">
[1] Ariotta, _Coherent cochain complexes and Beilinson $t$-structures, with an
appendix by Achim Krause_,
[<tt>arXiv:2109.01017</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01017).
</span>

<span id="bms2">
[2] Bhargav Bhatt, Matthew Morrow, and Peter Scholze, *Topological Hochschild homology and integral p-adic Hodge theory*, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci.
**129** (2019), 199–310.
</span>

<span id="raksit">
[3] Raksit, _Hochschild homology and the derived de Rham complex
revisited_,
[<tt>arXiv:2007.025760</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.02576).
</span>
