---
layout: post
title:  "arXiv reviews 4: Hodge numbers in positive characteristic"
stitle: "XR 4: Hodge numbers in positive characteristic"
tags: 2021 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\Pic{\mathrm{Pic}}
\newcommand\nil{\mathrm{nil}}
\newcommand\gfrak{\mathfrak{g}}
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\R{\mathrm{R}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand\T{\mathrm{T}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbf{P}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Fscr{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\dRhat{\widehat{\dR}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\Sym{\mathrm{Sym}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand\TR{\mathrm{TR}}
\newcommand\THH{\mathrm{THH}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bS{\mathbf{S}}
\newcommand\bQ{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand\bC{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand\bN{\mathbf{N}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand\Sp{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand\CycSp{\mathrm{CycSp}}
\newcommand\TCart{\mathrm{TCart}}
\newcommand\Fr{\mathrm{Fr}}
\newcommand\Br{\mathrm{Br}}
$
</div>

<!--ëéö-->

The recent paper [\[3\]](#ab) *Hodge numbers are not derived invariants in positive characteristic* by Nick Addington and Daniel Bragg answers several
open questions about the behavior of Hodge numbers under derived equivalence in
positive characteristic. In characteristic $0$, the Hodge numbers are derived
invariants up through dimension $3$ by Popa and Schnell [\[7\]](#popa-schnell).
In characteristic $p$, Hodge numbers are derived invariant up through dimension
$2$ by my work with Bragg [\[4\]](#antieau-bragg) and we showed in that paper that in dimension $3$ the numbers $\chi(\Omega^i)$ are derived invariants.

The authors construct a pair of
smooth projective Calabi--Yau $3$-folds $M$ and $X$ over $\overline{\bF}_3$ such that
 - $\D^b(X)\we\D^b(M)$ and
 - $h^{i,j}(X)\neq h^{i,j}(M)$

for some pairs $(i,j)$, where $h^{i,j}(X)=\dim\H^j(X,\Omega^i_X)$.

**Important note:** Daniel Bragg will be on the job market this year!
Just saying.

In fact,
their theorem shows that the dimensions $h^j(\Oscr)$ are not derived invariants. In their
paper,
$$\dim\H^*(X,\Oscr_X)=1\quad 0\quad 0\quad 1$$ while $$\dim\H^*(M,\Oscr_M)=1\quad 1\quad 1\quad 1.$$
The variety $X$ is a small resolution of a specific intersection of two cubics
in $\bP^5$ and it admits an abelian surface fibration $X\rightarrow\bP^1$. The
variety $M$ is a compactification of the relative Picard sheaf
$\Pic^0_{X/\bP^1}$ at the smooth fibers. Although it takes a lot of work thanks
to the presence of reducible fibers, Addington and Bragg show that the usual
Mukai-style derived equivalence between an abelian variety and its dual extends
to the families $X$ and $M$ over $\bP^1$, so that $\D^b(X)\we\D^b(M)$.

The Hodge numbers of $X$ are determined by a computer algebra system, while
those of $M$ are done in several steps. First, the derived invariance of
Hochschild homology and the degeneration from [\[5\]](#av) of the HKR spectral sequence for
$3$-folds in characteristic $3$ shows that certain sums of Hodge numbers are
derived invariant. Serre duality and the fact that $\omega_M\cong\Oscr_M$ is
enough to resolve everything but the terms $h^{1,0}(M)$ and $h^{1,2}(M)$ which sum to $7$. A
Dieudonn\'e-module theoretic argument using a theorem of Oda fixes the
Hodge number $\dim\H^0(M,\Omega^1_M)=1$ which settles everything.

After this, the paper contains three additional interesting sections.
 - Section 6 gives some information on the crystalline cohomology of $X$
 and $M$.
 - Appendix A contains a nice proof of a result of Abuaf [\[1\]](#abuaf) that shows
 that $h^*(\Oscr)$ is a derived invariant in characteristic $0$ up through
 dimension $4$.
 - Appendix B, written by Sasha Petrov, gives higher-dimensional examples
 of failure of derived invariants of Hodge numbers in any characteristic.

Petrov's examples are notable and start from his work in [\[6\]](#petrov) on failure of Hodge
symmetry for abeloid varieties.



# References

<span id="abuaf">
[1] Abuaf, _Homological units_, IMRN **22** (2017), 6943-6960.
[arXiv:1510.01583](https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.01583).
</span>

<span id="ab">
[2] Addington and Bragg, _Hodge numbers are not derived invariants in positive
characteristic_, [arXiv:2106.09949](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09949).
</span>

<span id="antieau-bragg">
[4] Antieau and Bragg, _Derived invariants from topological Hochschild
homology_, [arXiv:1906.12267](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.12267).
</span>

<span id="av">
[5] Antieau and Vezzosi, _A remark on the HKR theorem in characteristic $p$_,
    Ann. Sc. Norm. Super. Pisa Cl. Sci (5) **20** (2020), no. 3, 1135-1145.
    [arXiv:1710.06039](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06039).
</span>

<span id="petrov">
[6] Petrov, _Rigid-analytic varieties with projective reduction violating Hodge
symmetry_, [arXiv:2005.02226](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.02226).
</span>

<span id="popa-schnell">
[7] Popa and Schnell, _Derived invariance of the number of holomorphic
$1$-forms and vector fields_, ASENS (4) **44** (2011), no. 3, 527-536.
[arXiv:0912.4040](https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.4040).
</span>
