---
layout: post
title:  "Jonality"
tags: 2021
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bP}{\mathbf{P}}
\newcommand{\bC}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
$
</div>

<!--ë-->

[Asher Auel](https://math.dartmouth.edu/~auel/) and I have discussed the following definition, which is fun to think
about.

**Jonality**. Let $X$ be an algebraic variety over a field $k$. The *jonality*
of $X$ is the smallest $g$ such that there exists a smooth proper geometrically connected curve $C$ of genus $g$
defined over $k$ and a *non-constant* morphism $C\rightarrow X$.

Jonality is pronounced as in "Johan" plus "gonality".

The jonality of a curve of genus $g$ is ... $g$.

The jonality of projective space $\bP^r$ is $0$ since $\bP^r$ contains lines.

The jonality of a degree $d$ hypersurface $X$ in $\bP^r$ is at most the jonality of
a degree $d$ smooth plane curve, i.e., $\frac{(d-1)(d-2)}{2}$ since we can
intersect $X$ with $(r-2)$ generic hyperplanes. But, the jonality is typically
smaller: think of the lines in a cubic surface.

If $A$ is a simple abelian $g$-fold, its jonality is at least $g$. If
additionally $A$ is not isogeneous to a Jacobian, then the jonality is at least
$g+1$.

The jonality of K3 surfaces is interesting: apparently it is zero (at least over $\bC$).

The previous examples were geometric in nature. The jonality is also an
interesting arithmetic invariant. Asher Auel and I are working on the open problem of whether every Severi--Brauer variety $X$ defined over a field $k$ contains a (possibly singular
genus $1$ curve). In other words, we are asking whether the jonality of $X$ is
at most $1$. This was a question asked, in different terms, by Pete Clark and
David Saltman.

Let $D$ be a division algebra of degree $d$ and let $X$ be its
Severi--Brauer variety, an étale-twisted form of $\bP^{d-1}$. If $d=2$, then
$X$ is a genus $0$ curve so its jonality is $0$. If $d\geq 3$, then $X$ contains no
maps from any (geometrically) rational curve, so its jonality is at least $1$.

If $d=3,4,5$, then Johan de Jong and Wei Ho showed [\[3\]](#dejongho) that there is a genus $1$ curve
mapping to $X$; i.e., the jonality is $1$ in these cases. Auel has proved the
same result for $d=6$ using cohomological techniques to combine the cases of
$d=2,3$.

Above $d=6$, little is known in general. Recently, with an observation of Saltman, Auel
and I proved the following theorem.

**Theorem**. If $D$ is a division algebra of degree $7$ over a *global* field
of characteristic prime to $7$,
then $D$ is split by a genus $1$ curve; i.e., the jonality of the
Severi--Brauer variety of $D$ is $1$.

This result will appear in forthcoming work which also gives new examples in
degrees $8,9,10$. In the meantime, I would be very interested to hear of other
arithmetically interesting cases of jonality computations.

**Added 04 March 2021**: Asher has done some more digging and has uncovered the
following additional facts. The jonality has been extensively studied for
abelian varieties.
 - The jonality of abelian varieties is studied in a paper [\[1\]](#bcv) of Bardelli,
 Ciliberto, and Verra. They write $\gamma(X)$ for the jonality of $X$ and prove some results for general abelian varieties. Their best results in all dimensions
 are however superseded by a result of Pirola [\[4\]](#pirola), which says that
 if $A$ is a very general abelian $g$-fold over $\bC$, then
 $\gamma(A)>\frac{g(g+1)}{2}$.
 - The gonality of an algebraic variety $X$ is defined in [\[2\]](#bpelu) by  Bastianelli, De Poi, Ein, Lazarsfeld, and Ullery 
 to be the minimum of the gonalities of all normalizations of irreducible
 proper curves in $X$. Since the (geometric) gonality of a genus $0$ curve is
 $0$, that of a genus $1$ curve is $2$, and that of a genus $2$ curve is $2$
 (as they are hyperelliptic), bounds on the gonality of $X$ have implications
 for the jonality as well. However, plausibly $X$ might contain high-genus
 hyperelliptic curves and hence have large jonality but small gonality.
 For instance, Voisin proves [\[5\]](#voisin) that the gonality of the very general abelian
 $g$-fold over $\bC$ is linear in $g$; specifically, if $g\geq 2k-1$, then the
 gonality is at least $k+1$.
 - Using bend and break techniques, if $X$ has non-nef canonical bundle, then
 there are rational curves on $X$ (at least geometrically). So, in this case
 the jonality is $0$. See for example Section 8 of the lecture
 [notes](https://www.math.ens.fr/~debarre/Grenoble.pdf) of Debarre.

# References
 <span id="bcv">
[1] Bardelli, Ciliberto, Verra,
_Curves of minimal genus on a general abelian variety_,
Compositio Math. **96** (1995), no. 2, 115–147.
</span>

<span id="bpelu">
[2] Bastianelli, De Poi, Ein, Lazarsfeld, Ullery, _Measures of irrationality for
hypersurfaces of large degree_, Compos. Math. **153** (2017), no. 11, 2368-2393.
[<tt>arXiv:1511.01359</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.01359).
</span>

<span id="dejongho">
[3] de Jong and Ho, _Genus one curves and Brauer--Severi varieties_, Math. Res.
Lett. **19** (2012), no. 6, 1357-1359.
[<tt>arXiv:1207.4810</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.4810).
</span>

<span id="pirola">
[4] Pirola,
_Abel-Jacobi invariant and curves on generic abelian varieties_, Abelian varieties (Egloffstein, 1993), 237–249, de Gruyter, Berlin, 1995.
</span>

<span id="voisin">
[5] Voisin,
_Chow ring and gonality of general abelian varieties_,
Ann. H. Lebesgue 1 (2018), 313–332.
[<tt>arXiv:1802.07153</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.07153).
</span>
