---
layout: post
title:  "New paper: the K-theory of Z$/p^n$"
stitle: "New paper: K-theory of Z$/p^n$"
tags: 2021
description: "Research announcement with Krause and Nikolaus of an algorithm to compute K-groups of Z/p^n via syntomic cohomology."
---

<!--ëéłö-->

Achim Krause, Thomas Nikolaus, and I have uploaded our research announcement
[\[1\]](#akn) on the $\K$-groups of $\bZ/p^n$ to the arXiv. We constructed an algorithm to compute the
syntomic cohomology $\bZ_p(i)$ in the sense of Bhatt--Morrow--Scholze of $\bZ/p^n$ or
more generally $\Oscr_K/\varpi^n$ where $K$ is a finite extension of $\bQ_p$
and $\varpi$ is a uniformizer of the ring of integers $\Oscr_K$.

The BMS spectral sequence in this case collapses entirely and hence the
algorithm gives a way to compute the $p$-adic $\K$-groups:

$$\K_{2i-1}(\Oscr_K/\varpi^n;\bZ_p)\cong\H^1(\bZ_p(i)(\Oscr_K/\varpi^n))$$

for $i\geq 1$ and

$$\K_{2i-2}(\Oscr_K/\varpi^n;\bZ_p)\cong\H^2(\bZ_p(i)(\Oscr_K/\varpi^n))$$

for $i\geq 2$. The $\K$-groups are torsion and the prime-to-$p$ information is governed by
Quillen's computation of the $\K$-theory of finite fields.

See the announcement for tables of computations and references. After running our
algorithm in a bunch of cases, we conjectured that in fact the even groups vanish for $i$
sufficiently large. This is indeed the case.

**Theorem** (Even vanishing theorem). If

$$i\geq\frac{p^2}{(p-1)^2}\left(p^{\lceil\tfrac{n}{e}\rceil}-1\right),$$

then $\K_{2i-2}(\Oscr_K/\varpi^n)=0$.

Recall that Bhatt and Scholze proved the odd vanishing conjecture, namely that
odd $\K$-groups vanish and even $\K$-groups are
$p$-torsion free quasisyntomic-locally . (This had been proved in
characteristic $p$ first in BMS2.) Bhatt and Scholze also proved a more precise
statement which showed in particular that
$\K_*(\Oscr_{\bC_p}/p^n;\bZ_p)$ is concentrated in even degrees.
Combined with our theorem, one obtains the following consequence.

**Corollary**. If $i\geq\frac{p^2(p^n-1)}{(p-1)^2}$,  then
$\K_{2i-2}(\Oscr_{\bC_p}/p^n;\bZ_p)$
is $p$-torsion free.

**Added 03 May 2022**: Bhargav Bhatt pointed out that the stronger form of the
odd vanishing conjecture can be used to make the proof below easier.

**Added 14 May 2022**: Bhargav pointed out again that there is an easier
argument! I was worried about something the even groups in
$\K_{2i-2}(\Oscr_K/\varpi^m)$ somehow accumulating to contribute to
$\H^2(\bZ_p(i)(\Oscr_{\bC_p}/p^n))$, which is not possible since for *any*
quasiregular semiperfectoid ring $R$ the $p$-adic syntomic complexes $\bZ_p(i)(R)$
have cohomology concentrated in degrees $[0,1]$. So, this `corollary' is really
an easier corollary of the results of Bhatt--Morrow--Scholze and Bhatt--Scholze.


# References

<span id="akn_announcement">
[1] Antieau, Krause, and Nikolaus, *The K-theory of $\bZ/p^n$ -- announcement*,
    [<tt>arXiv:2204.03420</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03420).
</span>

<span id="bs">
[2] Bhatt, Scholze, *Prisms and prismatic cohomology*,
    [<tt>arXiv:1905.08229</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.08229).
</span>
