---
layout: post
title:  "arXiv reviews 9: no nonconnective theorem of the heart"
stitle: "XR 9: no nonconnective theorem of the heart"
tags: 2024 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\qc{\mathrm{qc}}
\newcommand\id{\mathrm{id}}
\newcommand\Sp{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand\Cat{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand\perf{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand\Mot{\mathrm{Mot}}
\newcommand\loc{\mathrm{loc}}
\newcommand\unit{\mathbf{1}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Fun{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand\fin{\mathrm{fin}}
\newcommand\Ac{\mathrm{Ac}}
$
</div>

Ramzi, Sosnilo, and Winges have proved a lovely result in [\[6\]](#rsw), showing that every spectrum
$M$ is equivalent to $\K(\Cscr)$ for some idempotent complete stable $\infty$-category $\Cscr$. In
fact, they prove that there is a functor $\Cscr_{(-)}\colon\Sp\rightarrow\Cat_\infty^\perf$ such the
composition $\K\circ\Cscr_{(-)}\we\id_{\Sp}$. The stable $\infty$-category $\Cscr_M$ is a
categorification of $M$.

<!--
The functor $\Cscr_{(-)}$ preserves colimits, from which one can deduce the following.
Let $\Mot^\loc$ be the $\infty$-category of localizing noncommutative
motives in the sense of Blumberg, Gepner, and Tabuada. Let
$$\M^\loc\colon\Cat_\infty^\perf\rightarrow\Mot^\loc$$ be the canonical map. Then, the composition
$\M^\loc\circ\Cscr_{(-)}$ is fully faithful with essential image the localizing subcategory of
$\Mot^\loc$ generated by the unit $$\unit\we\M^\loc(\Sp^\omega)$$.
-->

# History

I will not go into the interesting proof of this result which uses trace
methods and Goodwillie calculus. Rather, I want to discuss their application to a conjecture of
Gepner, Heller, and mine.

In [\[2\]](#agh) we made three conjectures, building on previous conjectures of Schlichting
[\[7\]](#schlichting-negative).

One was that for $X$ a noetherian scheme of finite Krull dimension, if
$X$ admits a local ring which is not regular, then $\Perf(X)$ does not admit a bounded
$t$-structure. This was proved by Smith in [\[8\]](#smith) using [\[1\]](#atjls) in the affine case and then in general by
Neeman in [\[5\]](#neeman-bounded). The second was that if $\Cscr$ is a stable idempotent complete
stable $\infty$-category with a bounded $t$-structure, then $\K_{-n}(\Cscr)=0$ for all $n\geq 1$.
When $n=1$, this was the main theorem of our paper which also proved the result for all $n\geq 1$
when $\Cscr^\heart$ is noetherian. These results were established by Schlichting in the case when
$\Cscr\we\D^b(\Ascr)$. However, Neeman disproved this vanishing conjecture in [\[4\]](#neeman-counterexample).

Only one conjecture remained open: that the  natural map
$\K(\D^b(\Cscr^\heart))\rightarrow\K(\Cscr)$ is an equivalence. In non-negative degrees, this is
Barwick's theorem of the heart [\[3\]](#barwick-heart). In degree $-1$, this followed from our work.
But, it remained open, despite Neeman's counterexamples.
Ramzi, Sosnilo, and Winges disprove it as a consequence of their main
theorem.

# The counterexample

Given their theorem that every spectrum is a $\K$-theory spectrum, it is very easy to describe the
counterexample. Choose $M$ to be a spectrum which is not
$\K(\bZ)$-local and let $\Cscr=\Cscr_M$. For example, $K(n)$ works for $n\geq 2$, where $K(n)$ denotes some Morava
$\K$-theory spectrum. Note however that every connective spectrum is
$\K(\bZ)$-local as is the $\K$-theory spectrum of every $\bZ$-linear stable $\infty$-category, such
as $\D^b(\Ascr)$ if $\Ascr$ is an abelian category.

Let $\Cscr^\times=\Fun^\times(\Cscr^\op,\Sp)$ be the $\infty$-category of additive presheaves on
$\Cscr$ and let $\Cscr^\fin\subseteq\Cscr^\times$ be the smallest idempotent complete stable
subcategory containing the image of the Yoneda embedding $\Cscr\hookrightarrow\Cscr^\times$.
The functor $y\colon\Cscr\rightarrow\Cscr^\fin$ is additive (and is in fact the universal additive
        functor into a small stable $\infty$-category), but it is not exact in general.
There is also a colimit map $\Cscr^\fin\rightarrow\Cscr$, which is a Verdier localization. Let
$\Ac(\Cscr)$ be the kernel, so there is an exact sequence

$$\Ac(\Cscr)\rightarrow\Cscr^\fin\rightarrow\Cscr$$

of small idempotent complete stable $\infty$-categories. The stable $\infty$-category $\Ac(\Cscr)$
is generated by cofibers of the natural maps $y(b)/y(a)\rightarrow y(b/a)$ for morphisms $f\colon
a\rightarrow b$ in $\Cscr$.

Now, $\Ac(\Cscr)$ admits a natural bounded $t$-structure, which I will not describe here. This
$t$-structure has been observed in various forms before; Neeman uses it and the exact sequence above
in [\[4\]](#neeman-counterexample). If $\K(\D^b(\Ac(\Cscr)^\heart))\rightarrow\K(\Ac(\Cscr))$ is an equivalence, as asserted
by our conjecture, then $\K(\Ac(\Cscr))$ is $\K(\bZ)$-local as $\D^b(\Ac(\Cscr))$ is $\bZ$-linear. 
If this is the case, then the cofiber sequence

$$\K(\Ac(\Cscr))\rightarrow\K(\Cscr^\fin)\rightarrow\K(\Cscr)$$

implies that $\K(\Cscr^\fin)$ cannot be $\K(\bZ)$-local, since we assume that $\K(\Cscr)\we M$ is
not $\K(\bZ)$-local. So, it suffices to prove that $\K(\Cscr^\fin)$ is $\K(\bZ)$-local to obtain a
contradiction.

However, $\Cscr^\fin$ admits a weight structure and Sosnilo's theorem of the heart implies that the
map $\K(\Cscr^\fin)\rightarrow\K(\Ho(\Cscr^\fin))$ is an equivalence in non-positive degrees; that
is to say that the fiber is connective and hence $\K(\bZ)$-local. Additionally, $\Ho(\Cscr^\fin)$ is
an additive $1$-category and hence $\K(\Ho(\Cscr^\fin))$ is $\K(\bZ)$-local since it admits the
structure of a $\K(\bZ)$-module. Thus, $\K(\Cscr^\fin)$ is $\K(\bZ)$-local, and we are done!


# References

<span id="atjls">
[1] Alonso Tarrio, Jeremias Lopez, and Saorin, *Compactly generated t-structures on
the derived category of a Noetherian ring*, J. Algebra **324** (2010), no. 3, 313-346.
</span>

<span id="agh">
[2] Antieau, Gepner, and Heller, *K-theoretic obstructions to bounded t-structures*, Invent. Math. **216** (2019), no. 1, 241-300.
</span>

<span id="barwick-heart">
[3] Barwick, *On exact $\infty$-categories and the theorem of the heart*, Compos. Math. **151** (2015), no. 11, 2160-2186.
</span>

<span id="neeman-counterexample">
[4] Neeman, *A counterexample to some recent conjectures*, [<tt>arXiv:2006.16536</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.16536).
</span>

<span id="neeman-bounded">
[5] Neeman, *Bounded $t$–structures on the category of perfect complexes*, 
[<tt>arXiv:2202.08861</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.08861).
</span>

<span id="rsw">
[6] Ramzi, Sosnilo, Winges, *Every spectrum is the K-theory of a stable $\infty$-category*,
    [<tt>arXiv:2401.06510</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06510).
</span>

<span id="schlichting-negative">
[7] Schlichting, *Negative K-theory of derived categories*, Math. Z. **253** (2006), no. 1, 97–134.
</span>

<span id="smith">
[8] Smith, *Bounded t-structures on the category of perfect complexes over a
Noetherian ring of finite Krull dimension*,
Adv. Math. **399** (2022) 108241.
</span>
