---
layout: post
title:  "arXiv reviews 11: every motive is a motive"
stitle: "XR 11: motiquity"
tags: 2025 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Vscr{\mathcal{V}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\qc{\mathrm{qc}}
\newcommand\id{\mathrm{id}}
\newcommand\Sp{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand\Cat{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand\perf{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand\Mot{\mathrm{Mot}}
\newcommand\loc{\mathrm{loc}}
\newcommand\unit{\mathbf{1}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Fun{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand\fin{\mathrm{fin}}
\newcommand\Ac{\mathrm{Ac}}
$
</div>

Motiquity means `the ubuquity of motives`.

In their paper [\[2\]](#rsw), which I wrote about [here]({% post_url 2024-01-18-xr009-rsw %}),
Ramzi--Sosnilo--Winges proved that every spectrum is the $\K$-theory spectrum of a stable
$\infty$-category. Ramzi, Sosnilo, and Winges have posted [\[3\]](#rws2), which proves a fantastic result about the $\infty$-category $\Mot$ of
noncommutative motives in the sense of [\[1\]](#bgt) and in particular gives a new proof of the theorem from the previous paper.

**Theorem.** If $\M\colon\Cat_\infty^\perf\rightarrow\Mot$ denotes the universal finitary localizing
invariant, then $\M$ is essentially surjective. More precisely, $\Mot$ is a Dwyer--Kan
localization of $\Cat_\infty^\perf$ at the class of morphisms $W$ consisting of those $f$ such that $E(f)$ is an equivalence for
every finitary localizing invariant.

Moreover, using work of Efimov, $\Mot$ agrees with the Dwyer--Kan localization at the class of
morphisms $f$ such that $\K(\Cscr\otimes(-))$ is an equivalence.

*Methods.* The basic idea is to use a construction of
Grayson to obtain suspensions for stability and to use. Another is to prove that
$\Cat_\infty^\perf$ admits the structure of a cofibration category in Cisinski's sense.

*Applications.* One notable application is that $\M$ preserves countable products. Another is that
$\M$ admits another universal property as the universal $\aleph_1$-finitary localizing invariant,
which means in particular that $\TC$ induces a functor $\Mot\rightarrow\Sp$.

Coming to you live from the [Abel Symposium](https://www.math.ntnu.no/Abel2025/) meeting, Ramzi explained
another application based on forthcoming joint work with Kaif Hilman. Specifically, if $G$ is a
finite group and 
$\underline{\Mot}$ denotes the functor $\underline{\Mot}(G/H)=\Mot((\Cat_\infty^\perf)^{\B H\})$,
then $\underline{\Mot}$ admits the structure of a $G$-symmetric monoidal $G$-category.

*Bonus material.* Details are given on Grayson's construction as well as the variant where one
works with motives relative to some other symmetric monoidal $\infty$-category $\Vscr$.



# References

<span id="bgt">
[1] Blumberg, Gepner, Tabuada, *A universal characterization of higher algebraic $\K$-theory*,
Geometry & Topology **17** (2013), 733--838.
</span>

<span id="rsw">
[2] Ramzi, Sosnilo, Winges, *Every spectrum is the K-theory of a stable $\infty$-category*,
    [<tt>arXiv:2401.06510</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06510).
</span>

<span id="rsw2">
[3] Ramzi, Sosnilo, Winges, *Every motive is the motive of a stable $\infty$-category*,
[<tt>arXiv:2503.11338</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.11338).
