---
layout: post
title:  "New paper: spectral sequences, décalage, and the Beilinson t-structure"
stitle: "New paper: spectral sequences" 
tags: 2025
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\nil{\mathrm{nil}}
\newcommand\gfrak{\mathfrak{g}}
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\N{\mathrm{N}}
\newcommand\R{\mathrm{R}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Fscr{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\dRhat{\widehat{\dR}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\Sym{\mathrm{Sym}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bQ{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand\bC{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand{\Dec}{\mathrm{Dec}}
$
</div>

<!--ëé-->

I am finally writing about a paper [\[1\]](#ss) I put on the `arXiv` last year about spectral sequences. This
paper gives a new construction of all pages of the spectral sequence of a filtered object in a
stable $\infty$-category equipped with a $t$-structure.

The idea is quite simple. Let $\Cscr$ be a stable $\infty$-category which admits sequential limits
and colimits. Suppose that $\Cscr$ moreover admits a $t$-structure. On the $\infty$-category
$\F\Cscr=\Fun(\bZ^\op,\Cscr)$ of decreasing filtrations in $\Cscr$ there is a $t$-structure where
an object $\F^\star$ is connective, i.e., in $\F\Cscr_{\geq 0}^\B$ if and only if $\gr^i\in\Cscr_{\geq
-i}$, the latter with respect to the given $t$-structure above. This is called the Beilinson
$t$-structure and has been considered in [\[2\]](#ariotta), [\[3\]](#bms2), and [\[9\]](#raksit).
The heart of this $t$-structure
is equivalent to the abelian category of cochain complexes in $\Cscr^\heart$. It is not difficult
to see that the homotopy objects $\pi_i^\B(\F^\star)$ are precisely the (co)chain complexes
appearing on the $\E^1$-page of the spectral sequence associated to $\F^\star$.

The paper [\[1\]](#ss) provides an answer to the question of how to coherently construct the other pages. I
use the $t$-structure to define an endofunctor of $\F\Cscr$, called $\Dec$. By definition, given an
object $\F^\star\in\F\Cscr$ there is a Whitehead tower

$$\cdots\rightarrow\tau_{\geq n+1}^\B(\F^\star)\rightarrow\tau_{\geq n}^\B(\F^\star)\rightarrow\tau_{\geq n-1}^\B(\F^\star)\rightarrow\cdots.$$

Let $|-|\colon\F\Cscr\rightarrow\Cscr$ denote the colimit functor, which exists as we assume that
$\Cscr$ admits sequential colimits. We can apply $|-|$ to the Whitehead tower to obtain a new
decreasing filtration

$$\cdots\rightarrow|\tau_{\geq n+1}^\B(\F^\star)|\rightarrow|\tau_{\geq n}^\B(\F^\star)|\rightarrow|\tau_{\geq n-1}^\B(\F^\star)|\rightarrow\cdots.$$

This is $\Dec(\F^\star)$. More generally, we can iterate to obtain $\Dec^{(n)}(\F^\star)$.

This leads to a simple definition of all pages.

**Definition.** For $n\geq 1$, the $\E^n$-page of the spectral sequence attached to $\F^\star$ is
the $\E^1$-page of the spectral sequence of $\Dec^{(n-1)}(\F^\star)$, with some reindexing.

The difficult part of the paper is the proof of the following result.

**Theorem.** This agrees with the definition of the higher pages given in [\[8\]](#lurie).

One reason I find this interesting is that in the presence of a symmetric monoidal structure on
$\Cscr$, and assuming that the $t$-structure on $\Cscr$ is compatible with the symmetric monoidal
structure, one finds that $\Dec$ is lax symmetric monoidal. From this, one can easily prove
multiplicativity results about all pages of a spectral sequence.

Another reason is that it makes it straightforward to compare, say, the two standard definitions of
the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence computing the $E$-cohomology of a space $X$, one using the
Whitehead tower of $E$ and the other using a cellular filtration on $X$.

This work did not arise in a vacuum and some of our results are closely related to work of
Deligne [\[4\]](#deligne), Lawson [\[6\]](#lawson), and Levine [\[7\]](#levine).
Some of the ideas also were explained in the PhD thesis [\[5\]](#hedenlund) of Alice
Hedenlund.



# References

<span id="ss">
[1] Antieau, _Spectral sequences, décalage, and the Beilinson t-structure_,
    [<tt>arXiv:2411.09115</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09115).
</span>

<span id="ariotta">
[2] Ariotta, _Coherent cochain complexes and Beilinson $t$-structures, with an
appendix by Achim Krause_,
[<tt>arXiv:2109.01017</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01017).
</span>

<span id="bms2">
[3] Bhargav Bhatt, Matthew Morrow, and Peter Scholze, *Topological Hochschild homology and integral p-adic Hodge theory*, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci.
**129** (2019), 199–310.
</span>

<span id="deligne">
[4] Deligne, *Théorie de Hodge. II*, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1971), no. 40, 5–57.
</span>

<span id="hedenlund">
[5] Hedenlund, *Multiplicative Tate spectral sequences*, [PhD
Thesis at Oslo](https://www.mn.uio.no/math/personer/vit/rognes/theses/hedenlund-thesis.pdf).
</span>

<span id="lawson">
[6] Lawson, *Filtered spaces, filtered objects*,
    [<tt>arXiv:2410.08348</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08348).
</span>

<span id="levine">
[7] Levine, *The Adams-Novikov spectral sequence and Voevodsky’s slice tower*, Geom. Topol. **19** (2015),
no. 5, 2691–2740.
</span>

<span id="lurie">
[8] Lurie, *Higher algebra*, [version dated 18 September 2017](https://www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/papers/HA.pdf).
</span>

<span id="raksit">
[9] Raksit, _Hochschild homology and the derived de Rham complex
revisited_,
[<tt>arXiv:2007.025760</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.02576).
</span>
