---
layout: post
title:  "New paper: the animation of the opposite of finite sets"
stitle: "New paper: finop"
tags: 2025 XR
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Vscr{\mathcal{V}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bF{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\qc{\mathrm{qc}}
\newcommand\id{\mathrm{id}}
\newcommand\Sp{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand\Cat{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand\perf{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand\Mot{\mathrm{Mot}}
\newcommand\loc{\mathrm{loc}}
\newcommand\unit{\mathbf{1}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Fun{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand\fin{\mathrm{fin}}
\newcommand\Ac{\mathrm{Ac}}
\newcommand\An{\mathrm{An}}
\newcommand\Fin{\mathrm{Fin}}
\newcommand\Set{\mathrm{Set}}
$
</div>

My paper [\[1\]](#finop) is out. The main result is that the animation of the category $\Fin^\op$
is a $1$-category, where $\Fin^\op$ denotes the opposite of the category of finite sets. Recall
that the animation of an $\infty$-category $\Cscr$ with finite coproducts is the full subcategory
$\mathrm{An}(\Cscr)\subseteq\Fun(\Cscr^\op,\An)$ consisting of the
functors $\Cscr^\op\rightarrow\An$ which preserve finite products. The animation of $\Fin^\op$
is thus the $\infty$-category $\An(\Fin^\op)$ of functors $\Fin\rightarrow\An$ that preserve
finite products.

The proof is to show that any $X\in\mathrm{An}(\Fin^\op)$, when viewed as a product preserving
functor $\Fin\rightarrow\An$ takes values in $\Set\subseteq\An$. For this, I observed that each set
with $p$ elements admits a group structure corresponding to $\bZ/p$. Since $X$ preserves finite
products, $X(\bZ/p)$ inherits the structure of a grouplike $\bE_\infty$-object in anima. But, it
also has the property that $p=0$ on $X(\bZ/p)$, which implies that $p=0$ on $\pi_i(X(\bZ/p))$ for
any $i\geq 0$ and any choice of base point. Using that $\bZ/p$ is a retract of $(\bZ/\ell)^N$ for
any other prime $\ell$ and a suitable $N>0$, we conclude that $\pi_i(X(\bZ/p))=0$ for $i>0$ and any
base point. It follows that $X(S)$ is a retract of a set for any nonempty finite set $S$ and is
hence equivalent to a set.
One can give a direct argument to show that $X(\emptyset)$ is also equivalent to a set, which finishes the
proof.

Georg Lehner has also proved this result Theorem 5.6 of [\[3\]](#lehner). His idea is very similar but instead
of working with group objects in $\Fin$ he works with Boolean algebra objects.
Another proof uses commutative algebra and the fact that if $S\leftarrow R\rightarrow T$ is
a span of perfect commutative $\bF_p$-algebras, then the derived tensor product $S\otimes_RT$ is in
fact equivalent to an ordinary commutative $\bF_p$-algebra. This was established in [\[2\]](#bs) by Bhatt and Scholze.



# References

<span id="finop">
[1] Antieau, *The animation of the opposite of finite sets*,
[<tt>arXiv:2508.13106</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.13106).
</span>

<span id="bs">
[2] Bhatt, Scholze, *Projectivity of the Witt vector affine Grassmannian*,
Invent. math. (2017) 209:329--403,
[<tt>arXiv:1507.06490</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/1507.06490).
</span>

<span id="lehner">
[3] Lehner, *Algebraic K-theory of coherent spaces*, 
[<tt>arXiv:2507.00221</tt>](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.00221).
</span>
