---
layout: post
title:  "Complete Segal objects"
stitle: "Segal objects" 
tags: 2025
---
<div style="display:none">
$
\newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ani}{\mathrm{Ani}}
\newcommand\nil{\mathrm{nil}}
\newcommand\gfrak{\mathfrak{g}}
\newcommand\A{\mathrm{A}}
\newcommand\B{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand\C{\mathrm{C}}
\newcommand\D{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand\E{\mathrm{E}}
\newcommand\F{\mathrm{F}}
\newcommand\G{\mathrm{G}}
\newcommand\H{\mathrm{H}}
\newcommand\h{\mathrm{h}}
\newcommand\K{\mathrm{K}}
\newcommand\L{\mathrm{L}}
\newcommand\M{\mathrm{M}}
\newcommand\N{\mathrm{N}}
\newcommand\R{\mathrm{R}}
\newcommand\s{\mathrm{s}}
\newcommand\t{\mathrm{t}}
\newcommand{\bA}{\mathbf{A}}
\newcommand{\bG}{\mathbf{G}}
\newcommand{\bH}{\mathbf{H}}
\newcommand{\bT}{\mathbf{T}}
\newcommand{\bW}{\mathbf{W}}
\newcommand{\Gm}{\bG_m}
\newcommand\Ascr{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\Cscr{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand\Dscr{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand\Escr{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand\Fscr{\mathcal{F}}
\newcommand\Iscr{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand\Kscr{\mathcal{K}}
\newcommand\Lscr{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand\Oscr{\mathcal{O}}
\newcommand\Perf{\mathrm{Perf}}
\newcommand\Perfscr{\mathcal{P}\mathrm{erf}}
\newcommand\Acscr{\mathcal{A}\mathrm{c}}
\newcommand\heart{\heartsuit}
\newcommand\cn{\mathrm{cn}}
\newcommand\op{\mathrm{op}}
\newcommand\gr{\mathrm{gr}}
\newcommand\Gr{\mathrm{Gr}}
\newcommand\fil{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand\Ho{\mathrm{Ho}}
\newcommand\dR{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand\dRhat{\widehat{\dR}}
\newcommand\we{\simeq}
\newcommand\Sym{\mathrm{Sym}}
\newcommand\HH{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand\HC{\mathrm{HC}}
\newcommand\HP{\mathrm{HP}}
\newcommand\TC{\mathrm{TC}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\coMod}{\mathrm{coMod}}
\newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\bMap}{\mathbf{Map}}
\newcommand\bE{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand\bZ{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand\bQ{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand\bC{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand\bAM{\mathbf{AM}}
\newcommand\bLM{\mathbf{LM}}
\newcommand\Spec{\mathrm{Spec}\,}
\newcommand\CAlg{\mathrm{CAlg}}
\newcommand\aCAlg{\mathfrak{a}\CAlg}
\newcommand\dCAlg{\mathfrak{d}\CAlg}
\newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\Gpd}{\mathrm{Gpd}}
\newcommand{\Sscr}{\mathcal{S}}
\newcommand{\poly}{\mathrm{poly}}
\newcommand{\perf}{\mathrm{perf}}
\newcommand{\Dec}{\mathrm{Dec}}
\newcommand{\CMon}{\mathrm{CMon}}
\newcommand{\CGp}{\mathrm{CGp}}
\newcommand{\bS}{\mathbf{S}}
\newcommand{\Fin}{\mathrm{Fin}}
\newcommand{\part}{\mathrm{part}}
$
</div>

<!--ëé-->

One model for $\infty$-categories is the theory of complete Segal objects in anima, due to Rezk [\[5\]](#rezk). The internal
theory of complete Segal anima is shown by Lurie [\[3\]](#lurie_goodwillie) to be equivalent to $\Cat_\infty$.
In general, one can use complete Segal objects to speak of category objects in quite general
$\infty$-categories.
In this post,
I explain that, for example, complete Segal objects in $\CMon(\Ani)$ are equivalent to symmetric monoidal
$\infty$-categories. Here, $\CMon(\Ani)$ is the $\infty$-category of commutative monoid objects in
$\Ani$, also known as the homotopy theory of $\bE_\infty$-spaces.
This material is well-known to experts and I claim no originality.



# Segal objects

Let $\Cscr$ be an $\infty$-category with finite limits and let $\s\Cscr$ denote the
$\infty$-category $\Fun(\Delta^\op,\Cscr)$ of simplicial objects in $\Cscr$. For $n\geq 1$ and
$1\leq i\leq n$, let $\rho_i\colon[1]\rightarrow[n]$ be the function $\rho_i(0)=i-1$ and $\rho_i(1)=i.$
Given an object
$X_\bullet\in\s\Cscr$, there are induced maps $\rho_i\colon X_n\rightarrow X_1$.
Moreover, since $\rho_i\circ\partial_0=\rho_{i+1}\circ\partial_1$, the $\rho_i$ assemble into a map
$$X_n\rightarrow X_1\times_{X_0}X_1\times_{X_0}\cdots\times_{X_0}X_1.$$ The **Segal condition** is that these
maps are equivalences for $n\geq 2$.
A **Segal object**, or **category object**, in $\Cscr$ is a simplicial object satisfying the Segal condition. The
$\infty$-category of Segal objects in $\Cscr$ is the full subcategory $\Cat(\Cscr)\subseteq\s\Cscr$ on the
Segal objects.

Suppose that $X_\bullet\in\Cat(\Ani)$ is a Segal anima.
The connection between Segal objects and category theory is that $X_0$ is supposed to be anima of objects,
$X_1$ is the anima of morphisms, and the Segal condition says that composition is well-defined up
to coherent homotopy. For example, given two points $x,y\in X_0$, the mapping anima
$\Map_\Cscr(x,y)$ will be obtained as the fiber of $X_1$ over the `source` and `target` maps
$X_1\xrightarrow{\partial_1\times\partial_0} X_0\times X_0$.



# Groupoids

Again, suppose that $\Cscr$ admits finite limits.
Let $X=X_\bullet\in\s\Cscr$ be a simplicial object. Suppose that $S\cup T=[n]$ is a partition of
$[n]$ and that $S\cap T$ is a singleton $\{i\}$. Then, there is a natural map $$X([n])\rightarrow
X(S)\times_{X(\{i\})}X(T).$$ One says that $X_\bullet$ is a **groupoid** object of $\Cscr$ if this
map is an equivalence for all $n\geq 2$ and all such partitions. Let $\Gpd(\Cscr)\subseteq\s\Cscr$
denote the full subcategory of groupoid objects.

The definition here is a form of the Kan condition.

The notion of groupoid objects is also important in theory of $\infty$-topoi. Indeed,
the $\infty$-categorical generalization of Giraud's axioms for an $\infty$-topos includes the axiom
that every groupoid object $X_\bullet$ be effective. This means that the geometric realization
$|X_\bullet|$ exists and that $X_\bullet$ is equivalent to the Čech complex of the natural map
$X_0\rightarrow|X_\bullet|$.

**Example.**
Constant simplicial objects are groupoids and groupoid objects are category objects.
A groupoid object is said to be constant if it is in the image of the constant simplicial object
functor $\Cscr\rightarrow\Gpd(\Cscr)\subseteq\Cat(\Cscr)\subseteq\s\Cscr$.




# Complete Segal objects

If $\Cscr$ admits finite limits, the inclusion $\Gpd(\Cscr)\subseteq\Cat(\Cscr)$ admits a right
adjoint $(-)^\we$. When $\Cscr=\Ani$, this adjoint can be described as follows. Given a category object
$X_\bullet\in\Cat(\Ani)$ there is a homotopy category $\Ho(X_\bullet)$ whose set of objects is
$X_0$ and whose morphisms are built out of homotopy classes of elements of $X_1$. One can define
$X_\bullet^\we\rightarrow X_\bullet$ by declaring that in simplicial degree $0$ it is $X_0$ and
in simplicial degree $n\geq 1$ it corresponds to the components of $X_n$
corresponding to $n$ composable morphisms each of which is invertible in the homotopy category.

One can use Yoneda to extend this construction to more general $\Cscr$. To do so, one uses the
univalence property. (This perspective was explained to me by Peter Haine.) Let $\Delta^3$ be the
$3$-simplex on objects $\{0,1,2,3\}$. Let $K$ be the quotient of $\Delta^3$ obtained by collapsing
the $1$-simplices $\Delta^{\{0,2\}}$ and $\Delta^{\{1,3\}}$ to separate points. Let $K^0\subseteq K$ be the
image of $\Delta^{\{1,2\}}$. Since $\Cscr$ admits finite limits, given $X\in\s\Cscr$, it makes
sense to evaluate $X$ on $K$ and on $K^0$.

The main thing we need about the right adjoint $X\mapsto X^\we$ is that the span
$X^\we(K^0)\leftarrow X^\we(K)\rightarrow X(K)$ consists of equivalences and that
$X^\we(\Delta^0)\rightarrow X(\Delta^0)$ is an equivalence for every $X\in\Cat(\Cscr)$.

A category object $X\in\Cat(\Cscr)$ is a **complete Segal object** in $\Cscr$ if the
groupoid object $\Cscr^\we$ is constant (in which case it is constant on $X_0$).

**Theorem** (Lurie). There is a fully faithful functor
$\Cat_\infty\rightarrow\s\Ani$ whose essential image consists of the complete Segal anima.

In more detail, there is a full subcategory of $\Cat_\infty$ consisting of the objects $\Delta^n=[n]$ for
$n\geq 0$, where $[n]=\{0<\cdots<n\}$. These assemble into a cosimplicial ($\infty$-)category. The
restricted Yoneda along $\Delta^\bullet\colon\Delta\rightarrow\Cat$ induces a functor
$\Cat_\infty\rightarrow\s\Ani$. It is this functor which appears in the theorem.
This means in particular that if $\Cscr$ is an $\infty$-category with associated complete Segal
anima $X_\bullet$, then $X_0=\Map_{\Cat_\infty}(\Delta^0,\Cscr)$, the underlying anima
of $\Cscr$ and $X_1=\Map_{\Cat_\infty}(\Delta^1,\Cscr)$, the anima of arrows in $\Cscr$.



# Symmetric monoidal $\infty$-categories

These too admit a description as certain functor objects. Recall from Section 2.4.2 of [\[4\]](#lurie_ha) that a symmetric monoidal
$\infty$-category is the same as a commutative monoid object in $\Cat_\infty$. In particular, the
$\infty$-category of symmetric monoidal $\infty$-categories and symmetric monoidal functors is
equivalent to $\CMon(\Cat_\infty)$. These admit a compact description as follows. Let
$\Fin^\part$ denote the category of finite sets and partially defined functions. The objects can be
indexed on sets $\langle n\rangle = \{1,\ldots,n\}$ for $n\geq 0$. The morphisms $\langle
m\rangle\rightarrow\langle n\rangle$ are functions to $\{1,\ldots,n\}$ defined on a subset of
$\{1,\ldots,m\}$.

Let $\Cscr$ be an $\infty$-category with finite products.
Given a functor $Y\colon\Fin^{\part}\rightarrow\Cscr$, there are partially defined functions
$\gamma_i\colon\{1,\ldots,n\}\dashrightarrow\{1\}$ for $1\leq i\leq n$ sending $i$ to $1$ and
undefined elsewhere. These induce a map $Y(\langle n\rangle)\rightarrow\prod_{i=1}^n Y(\langle
1\rangle)$.

**Definition.** 
A commutative monoid object in $\Cscr$ is a functor $Y\colon\Fin^\part\rightarrow\Cscr$ such that
for each $n\geq 0$, the map $Y(\langle n\rangle)\rightarrow\prod_{i=1}^n Y(\langle
1\rangle)$ defined above is an equivalence.

This definition is due to Segal who called these objects $\Gamma$-spaces in the special case they
take values in an appropriate model for the $\infty$-category of anima.

**Remark.** In anima, the commutative monoid objects model $\bE_\infty$-anima, i.e., the homotopy
theory of topological spaces equipped with an action of an appropriate $\bE_\infty$-operad.

The principal I want to highlight is summarized in the following proposition.

**Proposition.**
There is a fully faithful functor $\CMon(\Cat_\infty)\rightarrow\s\CMon(\Ani)$ whose essential
image consists of the complete Segal objects in $\bE_\infty$-anima.

**Proof.**
Both sides admit embeddings into $\Fun(\Fin^\part\times\Delta^\op,\Ani)$. It suffices to check that
the two sides match up. If we drop completeness, we see that
$\Cat(\CMon(\Ani))\we\CMon(\Cat(\Ani))$, since limits in functor categories are computed pointwise.
However, the same fact implies that an object of $\Cat(\CMon(\Ani))$ is complete if and only if the
corresponding object of $\Fun(\Fin^\part,\Cat(\Ani))$ takes values in complete Segal anima.
This completes the proof.

I like this description because it makes somewhat more transparent how the symmetric monoidal
structure interacts with the category theory structure. The proposition says that to give a
symmetric monoidal $\infty$-category, one must first of all specify an anima $X_0$ of objects
_together with a commutative monoid structure on $X_0$_. Then, there must be an $\bE_\infty$-anima
$X_1$ of morphisms. The `identity morphism` map $X_0\rightarrow X_1$ is a map of
$\bE_\infty$-anima. The `source` and `target` maps $X_1\rightarrow X_0$ are maps of
$\bE_\infty$-anima, and on and on and on.

**Example.**
More generally, if $\Iscr$ is an algebraic theory, then we see that $\Mod_\Iscr(\Cat_\infty)$, the
$\infty$-category of models of $\Iscr$ in $\Cat_\infty$, is
equivalent to the $\infty$-category of complete Segal objects in $\Mod_\Iscr(\Ani)$.

**Remark.** The proposition is related to a result of Gepner--Groth--Nikolaus, specifically
Proposition B-3 of [\[1\]](#ggn), which implies in particular that
$\CMon(\Cat_\infty)\we\Cat_\infty\otimes\CMon(\Ani)$, where the tensor product is taking place in
$\Pr^\L$.



# Grouplike symmetric monoidal $\infty$-categories

Recall that a commutative monoid $X$ is grouplike if the map $X\times X\rightarrow X\times X$
induced by summation and one of the projections is an equivalence. If $\Cscr$ has finite products, let $\CGp(\Cscr)\subseteq\CMon(\Cscr)$
be the full subcategory of grouplike commutative monoids.

**Example.** The $\infty$-category $\CGp(\Ani)$ is equivalent to the $\infty$-category $\Sp_{\geq
    0}$ of connective spectra.

**Lemma.** Suppose that $\Cscr$ is a symmetric monoidal $\infty$-category. If $\Cscr$ is grouplike,
then it is contained in $\CGp(\Ani)$.

**Proof.** Arguments such as we have already made imply that $\CGp(\Cat_\infty)$ is equivalent to
the $\infty$-category of complete Segal objects in $\CGp(\Ani)$. I claim that any complete Segal
object in $\CGp(\Ani)$ is in fact a groupoid and hence constant. This will imply that the entire
$\infty$-category of complete Segal objects in $\CGp(\Ani)$ is equivalent to $\CGp(\Ani)$.
For this it is enough to check that every morphism in a grouplike symmetric monoidal
$\infty$-category is in fact an equivalence. This is a straightforward exercise left to the reader.


# References

<span id="ggn">
[1] Gepner, Groth, and Nikolaus, *Universality of multiplicative infinite loop space machines*,
Alg. Geo. Top. **15** (2015), 3107-3153. \[[arXiv:1305.4550](https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.4550)\]

<span id="lurie_htt">
[2] Lurie, *Higher topos theory*, [version dated April 2017](https://www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/papers/HTT.pdf).
</span>

<span id="lurie_goodwillie">
[3] Lurie, *$(\infty,2)$-categories and Goodwillie calculus*, [version dated 8 October
2009](https://www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/papers/GoodwillieI.pdf).

<span id="lurie_ha">
[4] Lurie, *Higher algebra*, [version dated 18 September 2017](https://www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/papers/HA.pdf).
</span>

<span id="rezk">
[5] Rezk, *A model for the homotopy theory of homotopy theory*,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. **35**(3) (2001), 973–1007.
\[[arXiv:math/9811037](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/9811037)\]

<span id="segal">
[6] Segal, *Categories and cohomology theories*, Topology **13** (1974), 293–312.
